>> A fascinating new study shows
our gut microbiome has been
experiencing a potentially
catastrophic loss of diversity
over the last millennium,
possibly giving rise to various
common chronic diseases.
Is it too late to avoid
irreversible damage
to our health?
This is Gaia News.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
While most of us don't
ever think about it,
we co-exist with over
100 trillion microbes.
The majority of
which live in our gut
and are essential to our health.
Though the existence
of the microbiome
was first recognized
in the 1990s,
the full understanding of
its importance and mechanisms
is still in its infancy.
Dr. Alex Kostic is
a microbiologist
at Harvard Medical
School who has
been studying the microbiome
as a mediator of disease.
>> This concept of the
microbiome as a community
of organisms living on
humans and other mammals,
and playing an integral role in
our physiology really is a new
concept, something that
people have only been studying
for the past 10
or 15 years or so.
But what we've come
to realize as we study
the ecology of all
microorganisms living
on humans, especially in the
guts, it's incredibly diverse
and pathogens are really
the exception to the rule.
Everything else has
a lot of other rules
that we're still trying
to tap into but we
can be fairly confident
that they're not
driving the disease in people.
>> In their quest for a clear
picture of the microbiome,
researchers have recently
turned to studying its history.
>> What's really got me
interested in the history
of the human microbiome is
this concept of being able
to identify, if it
exists, a, quote unquote,
universal ancestral
human microbiome,
something that was common to
all of us before the process
of industrialization.
The reason why industrialization
is an important marker
in history for the microbiome
is because it coincides
with advances in medical
practices, advances
in sanitation, but they come
with the big science fact.
And so as we have all
these measures to prevent
the spread of
pathogens, we're also
preventing the spread
and acquisition
of beneficial
numbers that we think
could be playing an
important role in our health.
>> To deepen these
understandings,
researchers led by Dr. Kostic
recently conducted a study
in which they analyzed samples
of feces collected from caves
in the US and Mexico.
The samples were between
one and 2,000 years old,
and contained
perfectly preserved
DNA which was analyzed using
cutting edge genetic sequencing
technology.
The genetic information
was then compared
to that of modern
industrialized people.
The findings were
groundbreaking.
>> It turns out that 40% of
the genome is reconstructed
for a completely new species.
Never seen before.
Suggesting again
that what did exist
in these ancient
human microbiomes
is something that
does not exist anymore
and may have undergone
extinction over time.
>> Researchers then hypothesized
the causes of this alarming
phenomenon.
>> One thing that we noticed
from our ancient studies is
just how diverse their
carbohydrate metabolism
functions were.
And one of the
reasons was that they
ate all sorts of different
kinds of plant materials.
Generally, the most
agreed upon reasons
for why the microbes might
be going extinct is diet.
More processed
foods, less fibers,
very different composition
of macronutrients.
As you kind of
introduce this factor
of removing the food
that they rely on,
they start disappearing.
>> Just how is this linked to
the prevalence of modern-day
chronic diseases?
Ayurvedic practitioner
Dr. John Douillard
has been closely following
this field of study.
>> Your microbiome
regulates your gut immunity.
So if you don't
have good diversity,
you're not going to have a
really good immune response.
In the last 30 years,
the amount of food
that most humans
eat on the planet
has become 50% less diverse.
And there was the traditional
foods that people ate,
it's now being replaced
by processed high-industry
commercial foods.
And those are all
basically sterile
because the bugs have been
processed out of those foods.
>> The exact mechanisms by which
microbes perform their immune
functions and guard against
disease are still unclear
and is a major focus
of current research.
Researchers are also
working on resurrecting
ancient beneficial
microbes, but the process
is a complicated and costly one.
In the meantime,
is there anything
we can do to increase
our own gut diversity?
>> The best way to boost
microbial diversity,
the first step is with fiber.
And what fiber
does is not only it
does feed the bugs in
your gut but also attaches
to the bile, which is like
a Pacman in your liver
gobbling up toxins.
A Pacman in your
intestinal tracts
cleaning out all the villi
in your intestinal tract.
And when you eat that fiber,
it takes all the toxins
to the toilet.
But if you don't eat enough
fiber at the 94% of the bile
with toxicity to get back
to your liver and they
dump their trash
back into your liver,
making it more difficult for
your body to properly detox.
And in an environment
of toxicity,
environmental pollutants,
endocrine disruptors,
it's so critically important
we have a detox system that
is really optimal.
>> For Dr. Douillard, eating
seasonally also plays a vital
role in promoting diversity.
>> But the studies show that
the bugs in the soil change
dramatically from
season to season.
And we have bugs
that are actually
a really good at delivering
fiber as fuel in the spring
and carbohydrates and
starches in the fall.
So how do we get
microbial diversity back
is by starting to eat more
diverse foods in season.
Get the right bugs
at the right season
so you have the ability
to burn fat as fuel
in the spring and carbohydrates
as fuel in the summer.
>> Dr. Kostic has high hopes
for the future of this field
of research.
>> This to me kind of
speaks volumes to the power
of the microbiome and the
therapeutic value of trying
to identify microbes to
reintroduce them and develop
safe and effective ways
of reintroducing them.
It is going to be a
very important part
of the future of medicine.
>> As we await scientific
advances that may return some
of our lost microbe friends,
the responsibility is now on us
to do what we can
to welcome new ones.
For a new perspective,
this is Gaia News.
For more information
on this topic,
check out this content on Gaia.